---
layout: post
title: "REST MESS"
tagline: "What's in an API?"
tags: ["rest", "web", "api", "django"]
---

While working on a hobby project called
[freezr](https://github.com/santtu/freezr) I came across a few
assumptions I had made which turned out to be *wrong*. I'm going to
write a bit about these assumptions, since I found solving the
resulting problems very frustrating.

I had decided to write freezr API-first instead of UI-first. The
reason for this decision was based on that

* I had a very good understanding of the problem and what kind of
  actions it offered to the user, so there was no need to research the
  problem through UI prototypes etc. (*If you do not have a good
  understanding of the problem, you should **always** start with UI
  mockups and prototypes.*)

* I am very much in favor of delegating the web server to provide
  interfaces to core logic and let the browser be the UI (e.g. HTML5
  web application). This means that "web server's" role is really to
  provide an HTTP API to the core services, and the only bit of
  user-visible "web serving" happens when it bootstraps the
  browser-based application.

* I am *not* a UI designer nor UI developer. I'm much more a service
  architect and developer. I can do UIs that are best described as
  "engineering UIs", functional, but not pretty and definitely not
  having thought too much about usability. In particular, I was hoping
  to get someone else to actually do the UI bit for me — another
  reason for postponing UI development.

So I worked on freezr for a few weeks, on and off, and got it to a
situation where the service itself was functional (albeit lacking a
lot of production-level stuff like authentication, access control
etc.) and passed quite a lot of unit and integration tests. The
integration tests drove the service via its defined REST API alone.

I wrote the server using [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/). I
had a few reasons to pick up Django, one of them being familiarity
with it. That's familiarity, *not liking*. I don't like Django that
much, I've struggled with it in the past, but I still find it a quick
way to get an web app from zero to development demo. Albeit, it is
always a bit of a frustrating experience. I could have used Flask, but
I'm not as familiar with it, and the times I've used I've found
writing quite a bit of boilerplate code for things that come as
default in Django.

<small>(As a side note: I don't like node.js, so I'm not going to use
Meteor or its ilk. I find it frustrating to write in a language that
has practically zero thought given towards developer friendliness,
[orthogonality or understandable error and exception
handling](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CFReYwSwFbc). If I could
decide, I'd replace JavaScript with a standardised *and well designed*
bytecode interpreter where browsers would provide a
JavaScript-to-bytecode compiler shim for backwards compability. It
could even use [LVVM](http://llvm.org/) representation directly.) This
would give it much better re-targetability from other
languages.)</small>

Anyway, I ended up using Django with the [Django REST
framework](http://django-rest-framework.org/). I have worked with
TastyPie and found it *superlatively frustrating experience* when
trying to do anything "out of the tastypie box" so I was absolutely
sure that I would not touch it even with a long stick (unless it had a
very, very sharp end with a nuclear option installed). (TastyPie might
have gotten better since, so you shouldn't take my opinion as anything
else than an opinion.)

So I wrote a REST interface using REST framework. I think it ended up
nice and orthogonal. I especially liked the way how the framework made
it easy to provide URIs for resource references. Like this (edited for
brevity):

<blockquote><pre><small>
GET /api/account/1/
HTTP 200 OK
Vary: Accept
Content-Type: text/html; charset=utf-8
Allow: GET, PUT, PATCH, DELETE, HEAD, OPTIONS

{
    "id": 1,
    "domain": "http://localhost:8000/api/domain/1/",
    "name": "AWS account",
    "access_key": "AKIAJH3LIPN74P3XO3UQ",
    "active": true,
    "projects": [
        "http://localhost:8000/api/project/1/",
        "http://localhost:8000/api/project/2/"
    ],
    "regions": [
        "us-east-1"
    ],
    "instances": [
        "http://localhost:8000/api/instance/13/",
        "http://localhost:8000/api/instance/14/",
        "http://localhost:8000/api/instance/15/",
        "http://localhost:8000/api/instance/16/",
        "http://localhost:8000/api/instance/17/",
        "http://localhost:8000/api/instance/18/"
    ],
    "updated": "2013-11-29T13:19:17.963Z",
    "log_entries": [
        {
            "type": "info",
            "time": "2013-11-28T20:58:19.900Z",
            "message": "Regions changed",
            "details": "Added: us-east-1\nRemoved: none"
        },
        {
            "type": "info",
            "time": "2013-11-28T20:58:38.929Z",
            "message": "Refreshed 1 regions in 1.15 seconds, total 6 / added 6 / deleted 0 instances",
            "details": null
        },
	...
    ],
    "url": "http://localhost:8000/api/account/1/"
}
</small></pre></blockquote>

Using URIs for resource references makes the whole API *theoretically*
to have a very nice property: as long as the "root" point is known, it
is possible to find all resources in the system without any need of
the resource URL syntax. The interface itself will tell you that
instance 15 is located at `http://localhost:8000/api/instance/15/`
without you having to know *anything* about the URL structure. For all
you care, you could have instance 15 in a completely different URL
from other instances like
`http://fnord:6643/ISTORE.JCL/?iid=i-6a56cd3`. You, as a web browser
application programmer would *not* have to do anything to support
distributed resources!

I just *love* the idea. I though the REST API was just what REST is
really meant to be — simple, using HTTP primitives, clean URLs, with
the whole data model traversable without having to know about the
particular service's URL structure (the web server would tell the root
URL during bootstrapping).

Hooray. Time to go do some UI development.

For the UI side I decided to try out
[Ember.js](http://emberjs.com/). I knew its data layer wasn't yet
final, but I thought, what the heck, I'm doing pretty simple REST API
here, that shouldn't be a problem.

It was.

This is *not* Ember's fault in itself. It is just that Ember's REST
interface is designed to work with a *particular* flavor of REST
interfaces (rails). The REST API that *I* had defined *did not*
conform to this model. I searched the net for a solution, and found
[ember-data-django-rest-adapter](https://github.com/toranb/ember-data-django-rest-adapter)
which ... didn't work out too well either. It is not final either so I
should not expect too much, but it had the same problem as with
Ember's default REST adapter: it was making a lot of assumptions about
the REST protocol. In particular, it didn't work with resource
URIs. Well, no problem, I can just
<tt><strike>Hyperlinked</strike>ModelSerializer</tt> to get IDs
instead. And it wanted to pluralize resources in URIs, e.g. *a*
project was fetched from `/api/project/ID/` but list of projects from
`/api/projects`. Oh god. Then I found it actually was expecting
`hasMany` relations as `[{"id":1},{"id":2}]` and not just `[1,2]`.

No, I'm not going down that rabbit hole.

> If there is competition for most stupid convention ever, I'd
nominate the idea that *computers* are required to *pluralize human
words* when using a *computer-oriented API* to distinguish between
fetching *a* resource versus *many* resources. Quick, what's the
plural of **"locus"**? What if your API describes shoe pairs
(e.g. shoes), is the resource point for fetching records of many shoes
then "shoess"?

*Frustration and amazement.*

I came to realize that:

* Most of the backend to browser development is done in a tightly
  linked manner. They are collectively developed and either both of
  those work well together (you picked rails-friendly framework for
  rails backend), or either the browser side gives in (custom resource
  adapter) or the server side caves in (doing whatever is required for
  the responses to conform to client expectations).

* There is no universal "way of doing REST". *I though* I understood
  this, but I had just thought the disperancies were in resource
  access and action definitions, not so much in how the resources are
  serialized and deserialized to/from JSON format.

  <small>(Example of different action definitions: In freezr, a
  project is frozen with a POST to `/api/project/1/freeze/`. Another
  and entirely valid choice would have been to apply PATCH to
  `/api/project/1/` with content of `{ 'state': 'freezing' }`, where
  instead of defining an action, the request would declare the desired
  state.)</small>

  In reality there are many ways to do these, and *most frameworks are
  designed to work only with one particular REST protocol* without
  thought given to reconfigurability for different use cases. (The
  configuration of REST adapters mostly concerns with endpoint URL and
  what combinations of operations is used for different idioms like is
  partial change PUT or PATCH, can you POST over an existing record?)

* I don't know jack shit.

To fix the last problem I'm going to do some research on different
REST interface patterns and which server- and client-side frameworks
use then, and write a follow-up blog post on what I find out.