---
layout: post
title: "Replay"
tagline: "The history of video games"
tags: ["book", "history", "games"]
---

<div style="margin: 0 10px; width: 30%; float: right;"><a href="http://www.librarything.com/work/10131364"><img src="{{site.url}}/assets/posts/replay-book-cover.jpg"></a></div>

Lately I've been reading a book called [**Replay - The history of
video games**](http://www.librarything.com/work/10131364) by
[**Tristan Donovan**](http://www.tristandonovan.com/). As the title
suggests, this is a book about the history of video and computer games
up to the year it was written, 2010. But it is much, much more than
just a record of games of the past!

I've read quite a bit about computer, computing and gaming history and
I have to say this is **one of the best books** in that lot. If not
**the best** so far. This is not only because it is well written, nor
only because it feels like a proper global history of video games
(e.g. not being US-myopic), nor only because it digs and describes
trends and social causes for changes in games and markets. It is all
that, but most importantly **it captures the excitement** of the
generations of young and focused game developers over the three
decades of time covered.

I am not a game developer and probably at my age never will be. Yet I
feel connected — as much as the book is a trip down the memory lane (I
probably have played 50-70% of the 80's games listed), it also brings
up strong memories of my personal history of late 90's when I was part
of the "new media" internet startup bubble. It brings up memories of
the excitement of venturing on completely new and unresearched areas
of computing, business and entertainment. About how you can be
passionate about what you are doing. And sometimes, what kind of
<small>small</small> effect your work can have.

Whether you or someone else will agree with my view on the book is
likely to depend on how your own history connects with the themes of
the book. For myself the book gave me a whang that I still feel
resonating in me! When thinking about all of the pioneers and
breakthroughs in games covered in the book I cannot help but feel the
same optimistic giddiness right now too. It feels … good.