---
layout: post
title: "re re:Invent"
tagline: "and here we go again"
tags: ["aws", "reinvent", "reinvent2018"]
---

I have attended AWS re:Invent conference twice, in 2012 and 2013. This
year as the _Head of AWS Business_ from [Fiare
Consulting](https://fiareconsulting.com/en/home/) will mark my third
visit to the conference.

During the conference I'll be
[tweeting](https://twitter.com/paavolainen), posting some stuff here
and potentially also in my [LinkedIn
feed](https://www.linkedin.com/in/paavolainen). I do not have high
expectations of visibility, so you can read these posts in different
media as sort of a process where I collate my conference experiences
and try to understand them better in my own context. If someone finds
these useful, that's nice too.

> I flew in through Arlanda --- how probable is it you are sitting
> next to **another senior** from **another consultancy** going to the
> **same conference**? Empirically: not zero.

I flew in already on Saturday, giving me Sunday to adjust to the time
difference. While it is sometimes possible to avoid full timezone
adjustment, re:Invent is such an intensive event that it is necessary
to be full physical and mental strength, and that's why I reserved a
day for that. (I also exercised heavily by hiking to Turtle Head Peak
in Red Rock Canyon, and got fresh air and plenty of exposure to sun,
all of that helping the body to adjust.)

Anyway, this conference has gotten bigger and bigger. While I cannot
remember exact numbers out of my head, it almost doubled from 2012 to
2013 (from several thousands to almost ten thousand, if my memory
serves correctly). Last year it was
[43 000](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/reinvent-2018-is-coming-are-you-ready/)
and probably quite a few more this time.

While re:Invent **was** smaller way way back, and while it was
definitely more compact (all of it fit in the Sands expo centre),
let's not get too nostalgic: **it was big even five years ago**. There
was absolutely no way you could attend all of the interesting sessions
nor meet all the people you thought you'd want to meet! The fact that
there are now even more sessions, spread over multiple locations on
the Strip does make some practical things harder --- but "seeing all"
was back then as impossible as it is today.

I have other comments to come, but I'll cut this post short and just
get it out.

(You can see all posts from re:Invent 2018
following the [reinvent2018](/tags.html#reinvent2018-ref) tag.)
